Part 1: Piranesi

The book is written in journal form, with dated entries. It opens with someone (Piranesi) wandering the halls and vestibules of an expansive location. When the tides comes in, the person is flung around and submerged in water, in fear of death. But then it subsides.

The person is determined to explore this World as much as possible in their lifetime, and they have started recording the locations of points of interest. The location is an enormous House with three levels (Lower Halls – The Domain of the Tides, the Middle Halls – The Domain of Birds and Men, and the Upper Halls – The Domain of the Clouds.) The Lower and Upper Halls are largely inhabitable. Outside the house, there are only “celestial objects”: the sun, moon and stars.

From the onset, the setting is disorienting. The notation for the dates are unusual (“FIRST DAY OF THE FIFTH MONTH IN THE YEAR THE ALBATROSS CAME TO THE SOUTH-WESTERN HALLS”) and the location seems oddly expansive (“Nine-Hundred-and-Sixtieth Hall”). It also references multiple tides, which indicates the non-earthly origins of this setting (because the earth only has one tide).

All of this serves to cue the reader into the fact that the normal rules will not apply. This is some type of different world or an alternate reality that this character is exploring.

In the house, there is also one other person (“the Other“) there. There used to be at least fifteen others. Now, only two are left, as far as the narrator knows.

The main character, male and between 30-35 years of age, is referred to by the Other as “Piranesi”, though he believes this is not his real name. The Other is 50-60 years old, and he believes that there is some type of Great or Secret Knowledge to be found in the halls. Both Piranesi and the Other are scientists and searching for that knowledge. They meet on Tuesdays and Fridays to discuss their findings.

The other people who once lived here:

#3: The Biscuit-Box Man, a skeleton whose bones have been organized by size with the small bones stored in a biscuit box.
#4: The Concealed Person, a skeleton wedged into a narrow space between a Plinth and the Wall
#5 – 14: The People of the Alcove, skeletons found laying side by side on a Plinth. Three Female, Three Male, One Unknown. One of the male remains, nicknamed the “Fish-Leather Man“, has been there longer than the rest and the bones were all threaded together. There are also the remains of what is believed to be a monkey near them.
#15: The Folded-Up Child, a skeleton of a female of approximately 7 years of age, sitting with her knees up and head down. Piranesi wonders if this child was meant to grow up to be his wife, but then something went wrong.
#16: You

Piranesi hopes that his notes will be useful to whoever comes after him.

Piranesi has identified the people who used to be there based on remains found in the house. He seems to have a great deal of reverence and respect for the dead. This is seen in how he cares for the Biscuit-Box Man’s remains (by replacing the seaweed) and his unwillingness to disturb the Concealed Person from its spot, since he knows he won’t be able to get them back in there afterwards.

Piranesi also keeps a careful record of the tides. The first two entries are kept according to standard dates (“December 2011 to June 2012”), but then the following entries after that are all descriptive based on what was happening in the halls (“Thirtieth Day in the Twelfth Month in the Year of Weeping and Wailing, to the Fourth Day of the Seventh Month in the Year I discovered the Coral Halls”).

He fixes the dates so they are all descriptive, commenting that those original dates were from 2,000 years ago, and that the numbers are a silly way of keeping track.

In his record of the tides, the first two entries are kept according to standard dates and the rest in descriptive dates, but he decides that descriptive dates are superior since it “gives each year a character of its own”. It shows how Piranesi likely started off living a more normal life. As he’s been here, his reality has become increasing rooted in this strange world and he’s been here so long that he no longer remembers why the numbering system was a good idea. It also indicates that the numbers of the years no longer seems important to Piranesi, and instead he roots his memories in what was happening.

Piranesi also tells us that the “2011” and “2012” entries are from 2,000 years ago. This is the first hint that something is a bit off and that Piranesi is not necessarily the most reliable narrator. Has he really been living here for 2,000 years? As will become clearer later, he has misunderstood his notation system and thinks that those dates are numbers indicating how long ago it was (2,011 years and 2,012 years).

Piranesi describes the statues that he loves, his favorite being the Statue of a Faun. He wonders if having preference for one statue over another is “disrespectful” to the house because it “blesses equally everything that it has created”. He also notes that he saw something that resembled a leaf once and wonders if trees exist here. He notes that the leaf-like object had a surface that repelled water, indicating that it was meant to exist in the air.

Piranesi regards the house and everything in it with a sort of religiosity. He sees the house as a sentient, powerful being and feels the need to show respect and piety towards it. Piranesi views the world much like any other type of early inhabitant or explorer, developing a type of religion to explain the things he doesn’t understand.

The presence of the leaf initially implies that perhaps there is more out there beyond this seemingly endless house and its celestial surroundings. (But later we’ll see that is not quite what’s happening here.)
