Part 4: 16

Piranesi finally undertakes the journey to gather the rest of the scraps of paper from the gull’s nests. Afterwards, he is able to reassemble parts of it.

It someone writing about how terrible it is in the house. They say that there is nothing to eat, so they have to rely on “him” to bring food and water, which he leaves in the room with Minotaur statues. He laments his status as a prisoner and a slave. He fantasizes about killing “him”. (Piranesi thinks about how this person seems very unhappy and how he could have helped this person.) The person also knows that they are forgetting things, and they are determined to kill “him” before that happens.

Piranesi debates internally whether to tell the Other about any of this.

This seems to be Ritter’s writings while being held captive. We can probably assume Piranesi’s experiences were similar when he first arrived, before he’d figured out how to survive. It also seems seems to clarify that him the Minotaur is not really a Minotaur, but that Ritter had to go to the Minotaur statues because that was where food was left for him.

One day, Piranesi smells hints of “a spicy scent of coriander, rose and sandalwood”, which he recognizes as a perfume that someone must he wearing. He knows that 16 has arrived. Soon, the Other suggests that they will need to kill 16. The Other also tells Piranesi to be on the lookout for an old man (the Prophet), and he says that it’s probably time that someone killed him as well. Still, Piranesi does not mention having seen him.

Soon, Piranesi notices yellow chalk marks that 16 has made, writing down directions. Piranesi writes a message back, saying that he knows this person is looking for him and that he plans to avoid them since he’s been warned by the Other. He soon asks the Other whether it’s safe to read 16’s messages, and the Other says it’s better not to in case it drives Piranesi mad. The Other has also acquired a gun in order to kill 16.

A few days later, Piranesi catches a glimpse of 16 and sees that she is a woman. The Other is shouting at “Raphael” and telling “Raphael” that she “should never have come here”. 16 leaves a message for Piranesi identifying herself, talking about Laurence and Val. Before Piranesi can read it, he decides to get rid of it. He does, however, write back to warn 16 that Ketterley has a gun. The remnants of 16’s message says something about “having groomed other victims” and having “been here for almost six years” and it mentions a way out.

16/Raphael is a woman who seems to want to save Piranesi, which is likely why the Other doesn’t want him to speak to her. Her message indicates that there have been other victims (such as Ritter, probably) who have been imprisoned down here.

Piranesi looks up the entries for Laurence in his journal. Piranesi appears to have considered writing a book about Laurence Arnes-Sayles, in the context of him being a “transgressive thinker” in his field. (Ominously, he notes that people connected to him have disappeared and admits to the possibility that pursuing this could result in him disappearing as well.) There is already a book by Angharad Scott about him, but it’s more biographical in nature.

He also has notes about Laurence’s views that the Ancients had a different way of communicating with the world, which is an ability that has been lost. Unlike his peers, Laurence felt they could really talk to the world, not just in their heads but literally. Laurence thought that it might be able reclaim these powers through ritual magic. In 1976, Laurence developed an interest in the remains of a Ancient seer kept in a museum, for use in a ritual to transfer the Seer’s knowledge to himself.

After his requests to borrow the remains were rejected, there was a break-in at the museum involving the exhibit. Laurence’s next book mentioned a seer called “Addedomarus who had been able to walk a path between worlds”. Later, a man named Tony Myers admitted to the break-in and stated that Laurence, Ketterley and someone named Robin Bannerman had performed a ritual with the remains.

Eventually, Laurence develops his Theory of Other Worlds. He theorizes that any knowledge or power that disappears from this world must end up in another world and that a “doorway” to that other world is created in the process. In his 1979 book, “The Half-Seen Door“, Laurence claims to have entered one of these doors. He says that entering it the first time is the hardest, and it requires returning to a place where you last believed the world was fluid (for him, it was a garden from his childhood).

Piranesi makes the connection that Laurence is likely the Prophet that he met. He also remembers the Other invoking the name “Addedomaru” during one of his rituals.

This section mostly charts the development of Laurence’s theories. This new information confirms a lot of the stuff Laurence previous told Piranesi. It explains why Laurence says that the Other’s ideas are actually his own ideas. Also, while the comment about him potentially “disappearing” (due to pursuing his interest in Arnes-Sayles) is written flippantly in the journal, it seems fairly clear that that’s what ended up happening, unfortunately.

Piranesi notices that an alarming occurrence, the Conjunction of Four Tides, is coming up soon. The presence of all the tides rising at once is highly dangerous since many of the Halls will be flooded. Piranesi warns the Other, who is unconcerned, since he will not be there that day. Piranesi also wants to warn 16, so he writes her a message about it. And despite the Other’s warnings, Piranesi knows a part of him will “miss her” if she doesn’t come back.

He also notices a message, written with stones that says “ARE YOU MATTHEW ROSE SORENSEN?” The name dredges up a memory that disorients him. Piranesi (who knows that Piranesi is not his real name), recalls that the Other gave him his nickname (“Piranesi) since it is is associated with labyrinths.

In his journal, Sorensen is described as a man who is writing a book about Laurence Arnes-Sayles. (There are other entries about Sorensen, but Piranesi finds them useless because he cannot understand them.) Piranesi seems to realize that it is possible that Sorensen is a “forgotten part of Myself”.

The entry about Laurence showed an interest in writing about Arnes-Sayles, but this entry seems to indicate that he went ahead and decided to pursue it, assuming that Piranesi really is Matthew Rose Sorensen.

Regarding his nickname, Giovanni Piranesi was an Italian artist who was known for depicting fictitious and atmospheric images of “prisons”.

It’s also worth noting that one of the entries that Piranesi dismisses as being “useless” references an article called “The Importance of Labyrinths in Laurence Arne-Sayles’s Exploitation of his Adherents”. It hints that the Labyrinth structure is necessary for some reason, though we don’t know why (yet).

Next, Piranesi looks up the entries about the Other, Val Ketterley. It describes him as Laurence’s student who later repudiated Laurence’s teachings. It also includes a note to himself to see if Ketterley is willing to be interviewed (for the book about Laurence). Unfortunately, many of the pages in his journal that were about Ketterley have been ripped out.

It strike Piranesi to check the scraps of paper he’d found, and realizes that at least one of them must be from his journals. He pieces enough of them back together to form a full entry entitled “The events of 15 November 2012“.

Here, we get the hint that Piranesi/Sorenson may have ended up in Ketterley’s clutches when he approached him about being interviewed for the book about Laurence. Piranesi wonders who could have torn the pages out of his journal, but we know from the scraps he already pieced together that he had written about hating and wanting to kill Ketterley. So it seems likely that Ketterley did it or induced him to do it.
