Part 3: The Prophet

Contrary to the Other’s instructions, Piranesi approaches a stranger when he spots him. He is an old man. He explains that this world is a “Distributary World“, one created by the ideas from a different world. It’s existence is likely dependent on the existence of the original world. Piranesi theorizes that the statues are representations of ideas flowing from the original world. He claims that he was the one who theorized all of this, but it landed him in prison in the end. The old man mentions a few of the people (“that dishy young Italian”, Stan Ovenden, Sylvia D’Agostino, James Ritter) who came here before, who probably correspond to some of the remains Piranesi has identified.

He says that the Other’s name is Val Ketterley, and he describes Val as a “charlatan” who has never had an original thought in his life. The old man says that Val was the one who brought Piranesi here, and that the secret Knowledge does not exist. The “16” that Ketterley warned Piransei about is not the old man, instead “16” is someone who is searching for Piranesi. The old man plans to gives “16” direction here, but he says that it’s often difficult to get here and involves “slipping in between” which is harder for some than for others. (He notes that Ketterley uses various rituals to assist him.) He says that Ketterley may get violent if he sense “16” is getting closer, and Piranesi may have to kill Ketterley.

The old man also mentions that one of the consequences of staying in this world for too long is amnesia and mental collapse. The old man is only here temporarily. The old man says that Piranesi once asked to speak to him a long time ago, but he said no. However, Piranesi was an “arrogant little shit” then, but not anymore. He also mentions having a capuchin monkey there “in the early eighties”.

In his journal, Piranesi describes the old man as the “Prophet“, since he knows about the Creation of the World and other things.

This section is kind of a big information dump, but there’s a couple things worth noting:

The old man implies that the creation of this world was immoral in some way (“I’ve never been very interested in what you might call morality”) and could could have possibly led to the collapse of civilization (“but I drew the line at bringing about the collapse of civilisation”). He admits that he was guilty of the things that landed him in prison.

This section seems to confirm the Other’s statement that Piranesi is definitely forgetting things. It also interesting that the experience has humbled Piranesi so he is no longer an “arrogant little shit”. We also now know how the Other/Ketterley is managing to keep track of time and get in and out. But it also means that by withholding this information from Piranesi, taking advantage of the amnesia, he is essentially holding Piranesi captive here.

Soon, the Other tells Piranesi more about “16”. The Other says that there’s a good chance he’ll be coming here, and the Other admits that “16” will be looking for Piranesi. The Other gives Piranesi an even more dire warning about not speaking to “16”, saying that it may cause his sense of reality to unravel. He says that Piranesi is vulnerable because he is mentally unstable. The Other admits that if Piranesi really starts to go mad, that he may need to kill Piranesi.

Piranesi initially chimes in to say the he knows “16” is looking for him (because the Prophet told him), but changes his mind about telling the Other the truth and lies about meeting the old man. He says, instead, that the House revealed it to him.

The Other says that “16” may encourage Piranesi to attack him, which is exactly what the old man had encouraged Piranesi to do. It opens up the possibility that maybe the old man really is “16”. Piranesi’s decision to lie is of interest as well. Despite his general guilelessness, Piranesi has enough of a survival instinct to lie about seeing the old man, knowing that the Other is willing to kill him.

Piranesi is indexing his journal, making an index entry for “Stan Ovenden” (who the Prophet had mentioned), when he sees that Stan already has an entry (“Ovenden, Stanley, student of Laurence Arne-Sayles”). The same entry references “See also The disappearance of Maurizio Giussani”. Piranesi is stunned to realize that he is, in fact, forgetting things.

It also references “Journal 21”, but he is only on “Journal 10”. As he browses through the index, he sees more references to non-existent journals. He also suspects that some entries refer to Journals that exist (1-9) but that they actually refer to a different set of journals.

After inspecting his journals, Piranesi sees that his Journals 1, 2 and 3 were originally numbers 21, 22, and 23. Someone had scratched out the covers. In Journal 1 (originally #21), he finds the entry on Stan Ovenden.

The entry describes a man, Laurence Arne-Sayles, bringing together a group of his students in a farmhouse in 1987: Stanley Ovenden, Bannerman, Tali Hughes, Val Ketterley and D’Agostino. They are discussing a “great experiment”, but some of them have been voicing criticisms of it, which Arne-Sayles react poorly to.

Ovenden continues to criticize the experiment, however, and Hughes defends Ovenden. Soon, Ovenden and Hughes befriend a philosophy student, Maurizio Giussani, which alarms Arne-Sayles. They invite Giussani and his fiance, Elena Marietti, over for dinner. Arne-Sayles talks about his concept of a different world where architecture and oceans are merged. That night, Marietti leaves earlier, and Giussani stay behind. Guissani is never seen again after that. Ten years later, Arne-Sayles is convicted of kidnapping another young man.

Piranesi stops reading, overwhelmed by the words he does not understand and the new information. He is certain he is either forgetting things or have been crazy in the past or both. Upset, he hugs the Statue of the Faun for comfort. Piransei is inclined to think that he was mad when he wrote these things, but he has vague memories of things and places mentioned like “Birmingham” and “University”. He also knows that Ovenden and Laurence are real people because he’s seen evidence of it before.

This section sheds more light on the the House’s history. It also seems like the Prophet/old man is Laurence. We know the Prophet ended up in prison, and in the entry we find out that he was convicted of kidnapping.

A week later (to give himself a mental break), Piranesi looks up the entries for Sylvia and James Ritter.

According to his journal, Sylvia was a mathematics student who switched to studying anthropology. She was Laurence’s most devoted student. In 1984, she graduates and starts serving him, unpaid, as an assistant and driver. She also cut off ties with her family as a test of loyalty to him. In 1990, she disappears and is never seen again. Around that time, she had befriended a doctor, Robert Allstead, at the hospital where she was working as a receptionist. Laurence was jealous of the friendship and demanded that she leave the job. She refused and soon went missing.

Sylvia was also a filmmaker. She has two surviving films. One, “Moon/Wood“, and is about a cruel hierophant (priest) in ancient times in a small community. He punishes a woman who opposes him, by casting a spell that renders her helpless while he beats her. She calls out to the trees for help, and they attack him until he dies. The other, “The Castle,” shows a vast palace with enormous rooms, lined with statues. There are puddles water on the floor, and it is said that this is a recording of one of Arne-Sayles’s other worlds, described in his book entitled “Laybrinth“.

The entry about “poor James Ritter” pertain’s to the ending of Laurence’s career. In April 1997, a cleaning woman noticed a gross liquid seeping out of a wall that turned out to have a very ill man, James Ritter, hidden behind it. He was sent to prison, released in 2002. No explanation was given for the imprisonment of Ritter.

Born in 1967, James Ritter had been an attractive young man, who suffered from mental illness. After bring rescued, he was incoherent. Eventually he told police about being in a house with a flooded basement, filled with statues and a Minotaur. Ritter describes staying at the house for 18 months (between 1995 and 1997), where he slept in the white cave. Piranesi recognizes this as being from the first Vestibule. He thinks maybe Ritter was the one leaving trash around.

Laurence, in addition to being dangerous, is demanding and cruel. Sylvia’s two films seem to indicate that she had managed to get to Piranesi’s world and film some if it. The Moon/Wood video shows she later became disillusioned by Laurence. She likely saw herself as helpless, caught up in his spell, and she hoped that something will come save her from him.

Piranesi’s diary entries seem to indicate that he does not know yet about the House when these are written. (He wonders if Ritter was brainwashed into believing in its existence.) The description of a Minotaur comes up again, like the one Piranesi had seen references in the scraps of paper. Ritter says that he has to go to the Minotaur for food, which seems like it is likely referencing a person as opposed to a literal Minotaur.
