Part 6: Wave

It finally (finally!) dawns of Piranesi that the Other is not his friend, but his enemy. He, Matthew Rose Sorenson, was brought here as a slave. He figures out, too, that the Other is able to remember what he cannot because, like the Prophet/Laurence, Ketterley goes back to the other side instead of staying in the House. Piranesi plans to write himself a message out of stones as a reminder to help him remember, and he falls asleep to thoughts of revenge against Ketterley.

Piranesi also realizes that 16 is likely someone trying to help him. He goes back to where 16 had left her message (“ARE YOU MATTHEW ROSE SORENSEN?”) and sees that the stones are scattered and his warning about the floods has been erased. Piranesi guesses that Ketterley has destroyed these messages.

Piranesi replaces the warning and starts making other preparations for the flood, such as securing the remains of the dead and what not. As he does, he finds a grey bag with a gun, an inflatable boat and paddles in it. He deduces that this must belong to Ketterley. He considers taking the gun, but ends up putting it back in the bag.

On the day of the flood, Piranesi is anxious. The Other is here and says he had a change of plans. As he inflates the boat, he instructs Piranesi to strike Raphael if he sees her. However, Piranesi lets him know that he has figured out the truth of the situation. When Ketterley reaches for the gun, Piranesi kicks it away. Raphael shows up, looking for Piranesi, and Piranesi warns her that the Other has a gun.

Ketterley grabs Piranesi, but after a brief struggle, Piranesi and Raphael end up running together out of the Hall. He leads her onto a tall statue, since the waters are approaching. Ketterley shoots at them both, but soon the waters arrive. Unable to get to the boat, Ketterly is flung around by the waves, into the statues and dies.

When the waters finally begin to recede, 16 introduces herself as Sarah Raphael. She is a police officer. When she offers to take him home, he says that this is his home. Raphael gently tells him that he has parents and two sisters and friends. However, Piranesi says that he is no longer Matthew Sorenson, since he lacks all his memories. She asks him to go back with him for the sake of Matthew’s family, but Piranesi says he needs to take care of the remains here. Still, he agrees to consider it and she says she will return tomorrow. Piranesi takes care of Ketterley’s body, despite everything.

The next day, Raphael explains that he had once contacted Angharad Scott about his book on Laurence. When Scott later checked in on his progress, she learned Sorenson was missing. Knowing about the other victims, Scott told the police about Sorenson’s connection with Laurence.

After giving Raphael a tour of the Halls, Piranesi finally decides to go back with her. They exit via a shadow shaped like a doorway, located near the statues of two Minotaurs. 
