Part 2: The Other

Piranesi meets with the Other. He claims to be able to remember everything about this place, such as directions to any hall that he has previously visited. When the tide comes in below them, he reassures the Other that they are safe.

Piranesi has a deferential relationship with the Other. At the same time, Piranesi knows more about some aspects of this World than the Other (he’s more familiar with the patterns of the tides, for example).

The Other also gives Piranesi a memory test. When Piranesi doesn’t know what he’s talking about, Piranesi assumes it’s a trick question. The Other’s reaction is unclear. But as we’ll see later, it’s the first hint that something is amiss.

In his journal, Piranesi explains the arrival of two albatrosses last Winter. The Winters there are difficult and cold. He has to stock up on seaweed beforehand as fuel to burn. He had wanted to try drying seaweed in the Winter, but needed to experiment with ways of fastening them securely. As he was doing so, a large albatross showed up and was soon accompanied by another, presumably its mate. The albatrosses were unable to build nests with the wet seaweed they found, so Piranesi gives up three days’ worth of his dried seaweed so that they can build nests. The albatrosses soon laid an egg, which is now a chick.

Most of the Halls contain Falls of Fresh Water, so water is generally not a problem. For food, there is fish and good places to fish, but it took time for Piranesi to figure out where these places are. One time when Piranesi was very hungry, he went exploring through a hall where it was difficult to see because it was full of clouds (he notes exploring an unknown hall with limited visibility is not something he would consider now, nor would he let himself get so hungry), looking for fish. As he walked (trying not to accidentally run into a statue which can be painful), he stepped forward to find that there was no floor beneath him. He ended up free-falling, only surviving due to landing in the hands of a large statue.

There are also many birds there. One time, he saw them resting on two statues that he thought represented Industriousness. Piranesi takes it as a message, even though he considers himself to already be industrious, and catches extra food that day. That night, there is an unexpected storm and no fish for two days. After that, Piranesi thinks about the wisdom to be found in the flock of birds.

With that in mind, when he later sees two flock of birds land on three statues each, he takes it to be an elaborate message from the birds. Based on what the statutes depict (angel and trumpet, ship, book, clouds, child and mice) and the order they land on those statues, Piranesi deduces that the message is something about “A message from afar. Obscure Writing. Innocence eroded.” He decides he will revisit this later to determine the full meaning of the communication from the bird.

In this section, we learn more about how Piranesi survives in this place and more about the potential dangers. It also shows how he is has become superstitious, finding meaning in birds resting on statues. He is constructing a system of beliefs.

The Other announces that he plans to perform a Ritual, something that they’ve done four previous times, modifying it each time. The Other is convinced that the Ritual will help to “free the Great and Secret Knowledge” from this World. This time around, the Other is adding an invocation of a long dead knowledgeable king, Addy Domarus.

After he performs the ritual, the Other looks displeased. He thinks that these words need to be directed toward some type of specific, powerful, living entity. The Other feels that there is nothing powerful in the house. Piranesi privately disagrees, but instead suggests that the Other direct his Ritual to the Stars.

Piranesi also mentions a Hall which is slightly different from the others, with no windows where the air feels different. The Other thinks it might be a good temple, but it is much farther than the Other has ever bothered to travel. The Other wants Piranesi to go there so he can confirm the directions there and identify which stars are visible from that Hall. However, it involves traveling through an area with debris and Piranesi has no shoes. The Other chides him, offers to get shoes for him the next day and then demands that Piranesi make the (3.5 hour) trip.

In this section, we start to see the differing viewpoints of Piranesi vs. the Other. The Other is working on creating a Ritual of some sort. When the Ritual seems to have no impact, he tweaks it and tries again. The Ritual is clearly the Other’s pet project. Piranesi merely goes along with it to be a good sport, and he admits he has no clue what he’s doing.

When the Other brings up “those bones you found” to Piranesi, his dismissive about them, which contrasts with Piransi’s very deep interest and near reverence he has for the people they once were and the lives they lived. Even though the Other and Piranesi are working together, their areas of interest aren’t necessarily aligned.

Piranesi seems comparatively more concerned with developing an anthropological understanding of what came before them. He also has more of an interest in truly understanding the House, its tides, and the Halls within it. The Other mostly stays in the First Vestibule and has not traveled further than 4 or 5 halls away. Piranesi also regards the House respectfully and refers to “its blessings” when it comes to everything in it. In contrast, the Other describes it as “Just endless dreary rooms all the same, full of decaying figures covered with bird shit”. The Other also describes it as a labyrinth, as opposed to a house.

The next day, the Other equips Piranesi with a new pair of shoes, made of canvas with thick rubber soles and laces. Piranesi thinks about the many things (blankets, multivitamins, sleeping bag, pillow, bowls, socks, fishing pole, batteries, notebooks etc.) that the Other has given him over time. Piranesi does not know why the Other receives these objects, but he doesn’t. The Other also doesn’t fish or collect seaweed, the House just provides for him somehow.

Here we get the first hints that there is clearly something that the Other is keeping from Piranesi. He somehow has access to things that Piranesi doesn’t. Piranesi is apparently too guileless to imagine it’s anything other than the House simply providing it to the Other. As the readers, however, the Other’s being rude and demanding towards Piranesi, in addition to keeping some type of secret from him, hints at something foreboding that’s to come later.

As requested, Piranesi journeys to the The One-Hundred-and-Ninety-Second Western Hall that he had told the Other about. He reluctantly decides to spend the night in order to determine what stars are visible from there. It’s cold and dark.

On the way back, Piranesi realizes that he has lost interest in searching for the Great and Secret Knowledge. He doesn’t know if it exists or not, but he knows he doesn’t want to waste time trying to figure it out. The Other treats the house like a riddle to be solved and then discarded, but Piranesi thinks the House has value just as it is. Piranesi is also skeptical of the idea that this Knowledge will grant them powers, since he doesn’t know if he would want something like the power to “control lesser minds”.

Piranesi also finds torn up pieces of paper from a notebook littering the floor, with handwriting that is neither his nor the Other’s. They mention something about a Minotaur. He finds 47 pieces of paper and tries to reassemble them, only to realize there must be many more missing. He notices some that have been used by the gulls to construct their nests, so he plans to return in early autumn when the nests have been abandoned by the birds.

Piranesi gets the idea to try to convince the Other to give up the search for the secret Knowledge when he looks at the Hall in the moonlight. The Hall is filled with statues of people, and the beauty of them bathed in moonlight makes him think about the value of the House in and of itself. Piranesi’s guilelessness is also seen in his lack of interest in accumulating power, such as being able to have power over others.

When he gets back, he reports to the Other which is the brightest star visible from The One-Hundred-and-Ninety-Second Western Hall. When Piranesi tells the Other of his plan to abandon to search for the secret Knowledge, the Other sits him down to explain what this is a bad idea. He says that it’s for the sake of humanity, that they’d no longer be colleagues if Piranesi gives up the search, and that the labyrinth is tricks with his mind.

According to the Other, while Piranesi has a great recollection about all the Halls and their locations, there’s some things he forgets, and he loses track of time. The Other “takes precautions” in order to keep track of time, but declines to specify further.

Piranesi is confused by the Other’s claim that he forgets certain information. He decides to read through his journal to see if there’s any mentions of things that he does not recognize. However, it will be a time-consuming endeavor, so he plans to do it later. He also plans to continue helping the Other with the search, even though he no longer believes in it.

When Piranesi tells the Other about his plan to abandon the search for the secret Knowledge, the Other comments “not this again” and says that the labyrinth is playing tricks with his mind. It introduces the possibility that Piranesi is being manipulated by the House. So, either the Other is lying to him, or the Other genuinely knows something that Piranesi doesn’t.

The Other asks Piranesi if he’s seen anyone else in the labyrinth. When Piranesi says no, the Other says he must promise to hide if he does. He explains that the one Piranesi calls “16” is his enemy and therefore Piranesi’s enemy as well. He says that 16 wishes to destroy reason. When Piranesi asks about where the Other met 16, the Other is cagey and obfuscates. Piranesi takes this to mean that 16 must live in some Far Off place in the House.

Also, as we can see in this section, Piranesi is turning out to be a rather unreliable narrator, due to his gaps of knowledge and perhaps memory, too. Despite his careful listing out of all the people in the House, it seems the Other knows about the presence of another that he does not. Piranesi calls the unknown person 16 because it’s a continuance of his numbering of people that he is aware of (there were 15 before, so the next one is 16) that have been in the labyrinth.

Piranesi wants to know where the Other and 16 met, since the Other never ventures far from the first Vestibule. The Other’s cagey response indicates perhaps that there’s somewhere he goes that Piranesi does not have access to, though Piranesi never considers that possibility and assumes that 16 must live in the House.

A bit of a puzzle is starting to take form at this point. There’s a lot of questions about what information can be trusted and we do know that Piranesi’s own memory may be manipulated by the house. 16 is being presented as being “against reason” but we already know to be wary of the information we’re given in this story.

Piranesi goes to visit the First Vestible. He no longer remembers why he named it as such, and he wonders if the Other is right about him forgetting things. When he goes in, he recognizes the smell of rain, metal and petrol. He also notes that he’s made this observation before, but tends to forget it every time. Suddenly, he sees lights, hears footsteps and there’s the sound of someone talking. Then it’s all gone. There’s some trash from “old fish finger packets and sausage-roll wrappings” left behind.

There’s also a note signed “Lawrence“, asking to be directed to the location of a specific statue. On the blank space below that, Piranesi helpfully writes out the directions. Piranesi writes that he hopes that they will meet, but if “Lawrence” is a spirit, then he promises to take good care of his remains.

The story strongly indicates that Piranesi is being forced to forget things relating to the presence of some type of outsider(s). He forgets things that make this area unique, and there’s the persistent presence of foreign objects around here (mostly trash from leftover food).
